So next we're going to look at three commands.
Head, Tail, and Less.
So Head will look at the head of a file,
so the top few lines and you can determine
how many lines you want as well in the arguments.
Tail will look at the last few lines
and again it's like Head, you can specify
the number of lines you're looking for
and you can pipe things together
so you can grep before you pipe into Tail
so you only tail specific lines
that match what you're looking for.
And Less which allows us to open up a stream or a file
and basically go back and forth
and search and so on.
So far in the examples I've been showing you
what I've been doing is looking at individual files
where when we print to the screen,
there is a definite start and a definite end.
So it always ends.
When we are catting out the blog post,
it finished so it had a determined length.
But all these commands also support things called Streams.
So Streams are for this particular purpose
basically are never-ending files.
So when you...
Basically at the moment I've got a live search going
off to Twitter for one of the trending phrases,
I think it's freezing.
It's quite cold outside at the moment
and I have that writing to a log file called freezing.
Okay, so that's in the background.
It's a command called t, it's tricky to Google.
But the point is that this log file is getting
larger and larger.
So if we just look at freezing.log,
if we just keep looking at it,
over time, no of course no one's tweeting,
someone tweeted finally.
And a few more.
So the point is that this file is continuously getting
bigger and bigger.
Now we can tail that file.
So if we do tail freezing, we get the end of the file
and it immediately ends and comes back to our prompt,
but we can also continuously tail.
So tail dash f means follow.
So it follows the end of the file.
If I hit enter now, you can see that I don't get
my prompt back.
And the screen will keep on kind of updating
with each new line that comes into the file.
Now this is really handy for tailing log files.
So if you have some file that's getting bigger
and bigger like a log, like a web log for instance,
or some URL endpoint, we can tail dash f
and it will follow this stream.
From there we can do more things
like we can grep.
So what kinds of words are kind of coming up?
Maybe we just want the at symbols.
I think maybe we just want the Twitter handles.
So what we'll do is we'll grep for at.
I have a feeling there's a bunch of spaces
in front of this so we're not quite getting
what we're looking for.
So I'm going to stick those spaces in there.
Here is a tab.
Now I try and grep first without the follow,
see if I actually match anything.
Okay, so I've had to use egrep
which I mentioned before is a slightly
more advanced version of the grep.
It allows me to do irregular expressions.
Just trust for the moment that what this means is
it start at the beginning of the line,
there are some spaces, one or more,
and then there's an at symbol.
So we'll get the last few tweets
but if we do tail dash f, we now just get
the Twitter handles.
And I mentioned that we can have more
than one line.
If I go back to tail, I can do tail dash 100
or a thousand and it will give me
the last thousand lines and it will stop following.
So you can see all of the people
that have tweeted with a hashtag freezing
and if I push enter a few times
when a tweet comes in, we'll see that Twitter handle.
And then we could do more things with that if we wanted to.
We could do more manipulation,
but tail dash f is really useful
for kind of watching files and following files
in real time and then we can pipe that output,
that string to something else.
So I mentioned Head.
Head is very similar.
We can do head dash 10 and we can look at the first 10,
follow.log.
No, freezing.log.
We can look at the first 10 lines.
Okay, we can, what we can do is we can grep
or use that egrep that we had a moment ago.
Scroll up.
What we'll do is use the egrep on the freezing.log.
We'll look at the first 10 people
who tweeted about it.
That's not particularly the first 10 people
who tweeted at the time.
It's the first 10 that I captured.
So dash 10.
Oops, I didn't give it a file to follow.
Freezing and there we go.
So there's the first 10 people.
I think we can do dash n.
Not dash n.
If we get the line number,
man head.
No, I don't think we can get the line number.
So yeah we can see the Twitter handles
and we can do some other bits I think.
What else do we have on Head?
So dash n is the same as what we've got here.
I'm pretty sure we can do an offset as well.
So I think we can do like offset one.
Alright so we can start from the first,
like skip the first line basically.
So I think, just coming back actually,
you can say skip the first line.
You can say the first of the 10 I think,
but if only works with the file.
With a stream, there is no end
so it doesn't really know where to,
where to split the data basically.
But if we want to skip the first line,
we could do the first 11 lines and then tail dash 10.
Kind of funky but it does work.
So what we're doing is we're getting
the first 11 lines and then just getting
the last 10 of those first 11 lines
by putting the two together.
And the last one I want to show you is Less.
So there are two commands, More and Less.
And I think the expression is something like
less is more.
Opposite of more.
They almost do the same thing but Less is better
than More because it has more functionality,
it's easier to use.
So if you're ever kind of confused
about which one you want, you want Less 'cause less is more.
Anyway.
So we have this freezing file.
We could cat the freezing file out.
But if we're searching for something specific
like maybe Christmas...
We could use grep but we can also use Less.
So if you use less freezing, it goes into this
kind of cursor view.
So I can hit space and it will let me
kind of page down.
And if I do shift space, it will go, sorry,
b and f.
B is backwards and f is forwards.
And I can also search.
If I use the slash key, you can see down here
in the corner, it's changed to a slash
and I can search for Christmas.
I think I can do, oops.
So I just hit h.
Gosh, quit.
So h gives me the help.
And q gets out of Less.
And let's just look for Christmas.
There we have Christmas up in the corner there.
We see it matches a couple of times.
It's useful for kind of opening up,
to take a stream and just kind of pause it
and look at it.
So we could do tail minus f freezing.
And let's get the first 1,000 lines,
but let's pipe it to Less.
And that'll keep getting longer and longer and longer,
but I can page through in my own pace basically.
So I'm paging all the way down to the end.
I keep hitting space.
I'll get to the end.
It should print new lines as they come in,
but I can also go back, look for bits and bobs.
Whoops, there you go.
So yeah, that was Head or Tail probably the most useful
for kind of looking at the end of things,
certainly tail dash f.
Head being the opposite of Tail rather.
And Less for kind of going into text streams,
it can be used with files as well
for basic searching and paging back and forth.
See ya.